# Pushing out in Top

We discuss elementary properties of the pushout diagram in $\mathsf{Top}$.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJYIl0sWzEsMCwiWSJdLFswLDEsIloiXSxbMSwxLCJcXGZyYWN7WVxcc3FjdXAgWn17XFxsYW5nbGUgZih4KVxcc2ltIGcoeClcXHJhbmdsZX0iXSxbMCwxLCJmIl0sWzAsMiwiZyIsMl0sWzIsMywiXFx0aWxkZSBmIiwyXSxbMSwzLCJcXHRpbGRlIGciXV0= -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJYIl0sWzEsMCwiWSJdLFswLDEsIloiXSxbMSwxLCJcXGZyYWN7WVxcc3FjdXAgWn17XFxsYW5nbGUgZih4KVxcc2ltIGcoeClcXHJhbmdsZX0iXSxbMCwxLCJmIl0sWzAsMiwiZyIsMl0sWzIsMywiXFx0aWxkZSBmIiwyXSxbMSwzLCJcXHRpbGRlIGciXV0=&embed" width="366" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

Notice that a subset $A\subset Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z$ is open or closed iff $\widetilde{f}^{-1}(A)$ and $\widetilde{g}^{-1}(A)$ are.

We also observe that

$$\widetilde{g}^{-1}(\operatorname{im}(\widetilde{f}))=\operatorname{im}(f).$$

**Proposition 1.** If $\operatorname{im}(f)$ is closed (resp. open) in $Y$, then 

- $\widetilde{g}$ restricted to $Y\setminus\operatorname{im}(f)$ is an open (resp. closed) embedding whose image is $Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z\setminus\operatorname{im}(\widetilde{f})$.

- Therefore, $\operatorname{im}(\widetilde{f})$ is also closed (resp. open).

> Proof. Almost trivial using the observations above.

**Proposition 2.** If $f$ is surjective (or injective), then so is $\widetilde f$. 

> Proof. This is true in $\mathsf{Set}$.

**Proposition 3.** If $f$ is a quotient map, then so is $\widetilde f$.

> Proof. This follows easily from the universal properties. More specifically, we are given a function $\varphi:Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z\to P$ such that $\varphi\widetilde f$ is continuous. Since $\widetilde f$ is surjective, $\varphi$ is the unique map making this triangle (see figure below) commute. Therefore $\varphi$ is the same as the map induced by $f$ and the pushout, hence is continuous.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJaIl0sWzEsMCwiWVxcdW5kZXJzZXR7WH17XFxzcWN1cH1aIl0sWzIsMSwiUCJdLFswLDEsIlxcdGlsZGUgZiJdLFsxLDIsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dLFswLDIsIlxcdmFycGhpXFx0aWxkZSBmIiwyXV0= -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJaIl0sWzEsMCwiWVxcdW5kZXJzZXR7WH17XFxzcWN1cH1aIl0sWzIsMSwiUCJdLFswLDEsIlxcdGlsZGUgZiJdLFsxLDIsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dLFswLDIsIlxcdmFycGhpXFx0aWxkZSBmIiwyXV0=&embed" width="452" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

**Proposition 4.** If $f$ is an embedding, then so is $\widetilde f$.

> Proof. We need that the induced bijection $\widetilde f:Z\to\operatorname{im}\widetilde f$ is an open map. Fix an open subset $U\subset Z$.
>
> Since $f$ is an embedding, there is some open $V\subset Y$ such that $f^{-1}(V)=g^{-1}(U)$. We thus have the commutative diagram (see figure below) which induces a map $1_W:Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z\to\Sigma$, where $\Sigma$ is the Sierpiński space. In other words, $W$ is open and satisfies $\widetilde f^{-1}(W)=U$.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNSxbMCwxLCJaIl0sWzEsMSwiWVxcdW5kZXJzZXR7WH17XFxzcWN1cH1aIl0sWzIsMiwiXFxTaWdtYSJdLFswLDAsIlgiXSxbMSwwLCJZIl0sWzAsMSwiXFx0aWxkZSBmIl0sWzMsNCwiZiJdLFszLDAsImciLDJdLFs0LDEsIlxcdGlsZGUgZyIsMl0sWzAsMiwiMV9VIiwyXSxbNCwyLCIxX1YiXSxbMSwyLCIiLDEseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifX19XV0= -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNSxbMCwxLCJaIl0sWzEsMSwiWVxcdW5kZXJzZXR7WH17XFxzcWN1cH1aIl0sWzIsMiwiXFxTaWdtYSJdLFswLDAsIlgiXSxbMSwwLCJZIl0sWzAsMSwiXFx0aWxkZSBmIl0sWzMsNCwiZiJdLFszLDAsImciLDJdLFs0LDEsIlxcdGlsZGUgZyIsMl0sWzAsMiwiMV9VIiwyXSxbNCwyLCIxX1YiXSxbMSwyLCIiLDEseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifX19XV0=&embed" width="452" height="432" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

**Corollary 5.** If $f$ is a closed (or open) embedding, then so is $\tilde f$. 

When $f$ is a closed embedding, the pushout is often called the *adjunction space*, denoted as $Z\cup_fY$.

This notion is very useful and encompasses many common constructions, for example,

- The mapping cylinder/cone;
- The wedge/connected sum;
- (relative) CW complexes.

**Proposition 6.** If $f$ is a closed embedding, and $X$, $Y$, $Z$ are T1 (or T4), then $Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z$ is T1 (or T4[^1]) as well.

[^1]: T4 means T4 and T1.

> Proof. Suppose that $Y$, $Z$ are T1. In view of **Proposition 1**, any points in $Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z\setminus\operatorname{im}(\widetilde f)$ is closed. On the other hand, $\widetilde{g}^{-1}(\widetilde{f}(z))=f(g^{-1}(z))$ is closed, and $\widetilde{f}^{-1}(\widetilde{f}(z))=z$ by injectivity. This proves the first statement.
>
> Building on this result, we apply (the converse of) Tietze extension theorem for the second part. Fix a map $\varphi_0:V\to\mathbb{R}$, where $V\subset Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z$ is a closed subset. We look for an extension of this, using the universal property, of course.
>
> Let $\varphi_1:Z\to\mathbb{R}$ be an extension of $\varphi_0\widetilde{f}:\widetilde{f}^{-1}(V)\to\mathbb{R}$. Viewing $Z$ as a subset of $Y\underset{X}\sqcup Z$, we can glue $\varphi_0$ and $\varphi_1$ together to obtain $\varphi:V\cup Z\to\mathbb{R}$.
>
> We can then pull this back along $\widetilde{g}$ and extend it to $\psi:Y\to\mathbb{R}$. It's now clear that $\varphi_1g=\psi f$, which concludes the proof. Indeed,
>
> $$\psi f=\varphi\widetilde{g}f=\varphi\widetilde{f}g=\varphi_1g.$$

Unfortunately, the above does not hold for T2 spaces. Take $Z=(2,\text{discrete})$ and let $X=V_1\cup V_2$ be the union of two disjoint closed subsets of $Y$. Hausdorff property of the adjunction space (which is just a quotient of $Y$ which glues $V_1$ and $V_2$ into two points) implies that $V_1$ and $V_2$ can be separated by open neighborhoods. However, there are Hausdorff spaces that are not even regular, e.g. [this space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-topology).

**Proposition 7.** If $f$ is a cofibration, then so is $\widetilde{f}$.

> Proof. Easy to see from the HEP diagram. Omitted.

---
Post date: 2025/02/23 \
[Home page](https://caelestia.github.io)