# CW complexes part 1

Today's goal is to define CW complexes as a topological construction and deduce some clean properties. This part mainly follows Shastri, Ch2.

**Definition 1.** Fix $k\geq 1$. Given a topological space $X$ and a family of maps $f_i:S^{k-1}\to X$, $i\in I$, by attaching $k$-cells to $X$ we mean the pushout diagram

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGJpZ3NxY3VwX0lTXntrLTF9Il0sWzEsMCwiXFxiaWdzcWN1cF9JRF5rIl0sWzAsMSwiWCJdLFsxLDEsIlkiXSxbMCwyXSxbMiwzXSxbMSwzLCJcXHNxY3VwXFxwaGlfaSJdLFswLDFdXQ== -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGJpZ3NxY3VwX0lTXntrLTF9Il0sWzEsMCwiXFxiaWdzcWN1cF9JRF5rIl0sWzAsMSwiWCJdLFsxLDEsIlkiXSxbMCwyXSxbMiwzXSxbMSwzLCJcXHNxY3VwXFxwaGlfaSJdLFswLDFdXQ==&embed" width="368" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

Based on [the last post](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0223.html), we immediately get

- $X$ is a closed subset of $Y$, and
- Let $\phi_i$ be the right map restricted to each $k$-disk. These are sometimes called the *characteristic maps*. Then each *open cell* in $Y$, defined as $\phi_i(\operatorname{int}D^k)$, is homeomorphic to $\operatorname{int}(D^k)$ via $\phi_i$.
- However, in general a *closed cell* $\operatorname{im}(\phi_i)$, denoted as $e_i$, need not be homeomorphic to a disk.

**Lemma 2.** We have

1. A subset $A\subset Y$ is closed iff $A\cap X$ is closed in $X$ and every $A\cap e_i$ is closed in $e_i$.
1. If $X$ is Hausdorff, then the closed cells are closed in $Y$.

> Proof. The 'only if' is trivial as $X$, $e_i$'s are subsets. To see the other direction, notice that $A\cap e_i$ is closed in $e_i$ implies $\phi_i^{-1}(A)$ is closed in $D^k$, then use that $Y$ is a quotient space.
>
> Part 2. follows from 1, and
>
> $$X\cap e_i=\operatorname{im}(f_i),$$
>
> a slight variation of the equation in [the last post](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0223.html).

The following argument depicts the similarity of $Y$ and $X$.

For a subset $B\subset S^{k-1}$, we define

$$N_\varepsilon(B):=\{x\in D^k:\vert x\vert>\varepsilon\,\wedge\,\frac{x}{\vert x\vert}\in B\},$$

where $\varepsilon\in(0,1)$. This extends $B$ into $D^k$ in a consistent manner.

Applying this construction on $X$, we choose any function $\varepsilon:I\to(0,1)$. Given any subset $A\subset X$, put

$$N_\varepsilon(A):=A\cup\bigcup_{i\in I}\phi_i\circ N_{\varepsilon(i)}\circ\phi_i^{-1}(A).$$

Clearly,

- $N_\varepsilon(A)\cap X=A$.
- $N_\varepsilon(A)\cap N_\varepsilon(B)=N_\varepsilon(A\cap B)$, for two subsets $A$, $B$.
- $N_\varepsilon(A)$ is open in $Y$ iff $A$ is open in $X$.
- $A$ is a SDR of $N_\varepsilon(A)$.

We derive that

**Theorem 3.** if $X$ is T1, T2 or T4[^1], then $Y$ has this property as well.

[^1]: T4 means T4 and T1.

> Proof. The statement about T1 and T2 is easy, by just listing the cases. Fix $a\neq b$ be different points in $Y$. We have 
>
> Case 1. Both are in $X$. Pick the separating neighborhood(s) in $X$ and use $N_\varepsilon$ to extend them to open subset(s) of $Y$. The choice of $\varepsilon$ is irrelevant.
>
> Case 2. $a\in X$ and $b$ lies in the $i$-th open cell. By demanding $\varepsilon(i)>\vert\phi_i^{-1}(b)\vert$, the entire $N_\varepsilon(X)$ will be disjoint from a neighborhood of $b$ in the open cell.
>
> Case 3. $a$, $b$ both lie in the open cells. This is trivial, and we have proven the first part.
>
> Now fix disjoint closed subsets $A$, $B$ of $Y$. Define
>
> $$\varepsilon(i)=1-\frac{1}{2}d(\phi_i^{-1}(A),\phi_i^{-1}(B)),$$
>
> where $d$ stands for the standard metric, applied to closed subsets of $D^k$. If $\phi_i^{-1}(A)$ or $\phi_i^{-1}(B)$ is empty, we may choose any $\varepsilon(i)$.
>
> The point of this is we want disjoint closed subsets of $Y$,
>
> $$A':=A\cup\overline{N_\varepsilon(A\cap X)},\quad B':=B\cup\overline{N_\varepsilon(B\cap X)}.$$
>
> Notice that from what we've proven, $Y$, hence $e_i$, is Hausdorff. Therefore each $\phi_i$ is closed, thus we know the closure of $N_\varepsilon(A\cap X)$ in $e_i$ is just the image of the closure of $N_{\varepsilon(i)}(\cdots)$ under $\phi_i$. It follows that $A'$ and $B'$ are indeed disjoint.
>
> Since each open cell is normal, there are disjoint open subsets $U_i$, $V_i$ of $\phi_i(\operatorname{int}D^k)$, and hence of $Y$, such that
>
> $$A'\cap\phi_i(\operatorname{int}D^k)\subset U_i,\quad B'\cap\phi_i(\operatorname{int}D^k)\subset V_i.$$
>
> Finally, we obtain open subsets in $Y$
>
> $$N_\varepsilon(A\cap X)\cup\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i,\quad N_\varepsilon(B\cap X)\cup\bigcup_{i\in I}V_i,$$
>
> separating $A$ and $B$.
>
> An alternative, cleaner proof of the statement regarding T1 and T4 is covered in [the last post](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0223.html).

We are now ready to give the following definition.

**Definition.** A CW complex is a space $X$, together with a sequence of subsets $\{X^{(n)}:n\geq 0\}$ called the $n$-th skeletons of $X$, satisfying

1. $X^{(0)}$ is a discrete space.
2. $X^{(n)}$ is obtained by attaching $n$-cells to $X^{(n-1)}$, for all $n\geq 1$.
3. $X=\bigcup_{n\geq 0}X^{(n)}$ is the colimit of the $X^{(n)}$.

The morphisms, called cellular maps, between CW complexes $f:X\to Y$ are continuous maps such that $f(X^{(n)})\subset Y^{(n)}$ for all $n\geq 0$. We thus have a category $\mathsf{CW}$.

TODO

---
Post date: 2025/02/27 \
[Home page](https://caelestia.github.io)