# CW complexes part 2

Today's goal is to introduce some more abstraction to the game and discuss an algebraic viewpoint of the theme. 

- This part does not follow any text in particular. I should say I learned a lot from online resources such as nlab and stacks project.

## Simplicial Objects/Sets

When referring to a 'cell complex', we think of a space built from the simplicial simplices, which are spaces denote by $\vert\Delta_n\vert$. This immediately leads us to *define* cell complexes as presheaves on the simplices. But what morphisms do we need? Inspired by the maps in $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{Top}}(\vert\Delta_n\vert,\vert\Delta_m\vert)$, we describe the simplices with the following category, which proves to be suitable for many applications.

Let $[n]:=n+1$.

**Definition.** Let $\Delta$ be the category of nonzero finite ordinals with morphisms the order-preserving functions. We can write 

$$\operatorname{Ob}(\Delta)=\mathbb{Z}_{>0}=\{[0],[1],\cdots\}.$$

The category of *simplicial objects* in $\mathcal{C}$ is the the category of $\mathcal{C}$-valued presheaves on $\Delta$, denoted as 

$$\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}:=\operatorname{Fct}(\Delta^{\operatorname{op}},\mathcal{C}).$$

In particular, if $\mathcal{C}=\mathsf{Set}$, objects of $\mathsf{sSet}$ are called *simplicial sets*. 

**Example.** Pick any $C\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C})$, we obviously have the constant simplicial object $\operatorname{const}(C)$. It's just the constant presheaf. The functor $C\mapsto\operatorname{const}(C)$ is fully faithful.

**Example 1.** In view of the Yoneda embedding

$$h_\Delta:\Delta\longrightarrow\Delta^\wedge=\mathsf{sSet},$$

we have *the standard $n$-simplex* $\Delta^n:=h_\Delta([n])$ for $n\geq 0$.

Now we turn back to understand the morphisms of $\Delta$. Between $[n]$ and $[m]$ there might be many maps (well, the exact number is $\binom{n+m+1}{m}$), one can easily show that any map is a composition of the following two classes of maps:

- co-faces $d^i:[n-1]\to [n]$ is the injective map skipping $i$. Here $i\in [n]$ and $n\geq 1$.
- co-degeneracy $s^i:[n+1]\to [n]$ is the surjective map taking the value $i$ twice. Here $i\in [n]$.

These satisfies what is called the (co-)simplicial identities:

$$\begin{align*}
    & d^jd^i=d^id^{j-1}, & i<j, \\
    & s^jd^i=d^is^{j-1}, & i<j, \\
    & s^id^i=\operatorname{id}=s^id^{i+1}, & \forall i, \tag{1}\\
    & s^jd^i=d^{i-1}s^j, & i>j+1, \\
    & s^js^i=s^is^{j+1}, & i\leq j. \\
\end{align*}$$

**Proposition 2.** $\operatorname{Mor}(\Delta)$ is generated by the $d^i$ and $s^i$, and $(1)$ is a full set of relationship between the generators.

> Proof. Injective maps $\overset{1:1}\longleftrightarrow$ $\{d^\alpha d^\beta d^\gamma\cdots\}$ such that $\alpha>\beta>\gamma>\cdots$.
>
> Surjective maps $\overset{1:1}\longleftrightarrow$ $\{s^\alpha s^\beta s^\gamma\cdots\}$ such that $\alpha<\beta<\gamma<\cdots$.
>
> Every map $[n]\to [m]$ *uniquely* factorizes through its image ($\simeq [k]$) as 
> 
> $$[n]\twoheadrightarrow[k]\hookrightarrow[m].$$

Therefore, a simplicial object $X$ is equivalently

- a family of objects $\{X_n\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C}):n\geq 0\}$,
- face morphisms $d_i:X_n\to X_{n-1}$, ($n\geq 1$), and
- degeneracy morphisms $s_i:X_n\to X_{n+1}$;

satisfying the simplicial identities, which is just $(1)$ with arrows reverted.

We shall mainly focus on simplicial sets, so each $X_n$ is a set. This is the setup for combinatorial and topological results. For algebraic interests, common choices of $\mathcal{C}$ are monoidal or Abelian categories.

**Example 3.** We define a simplicial subset $\partial\Delta^n$ of $\Delta^n$ as

$$(\partial\Delta^n)_m:=\{[m]\xrightarrow{f}[n]:\operatorname{im}(f)\neq[n]\}.$$

The face and degeneracy maps restricts to these subsets, thus defining a simplicial subset.

**Definition-Proposition 3.(Eilenberg-Zilber)** Let $X$ be a simplicial set. The elements of $X_n$ are called the *$n$-simplices* of $X$. A simplex in $X$ is called *degenerate* if it's in the image of some $s_i$.

Then every simplex $x$ has a unique factorization $x=Sy$, where $y$ is non-degenerate and $S$ is a composition of degeneracy maps.

> Proof. Existence by well-orderedness of $\mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$. 
> 
> Suppose $x=Sy=S_1y'$. By the simplicial identities, there is some composition of face maps $D$ satisfying $DS=\operatorname{id}$. We have
>
> $$Dx=y=DS_1y'.$$
>
> There is some $S_2$, $D_2$ such that $S_2D_2=DS_1$, so $y=S_2D_2y'$. $y$ is non-degenerate implies $S_2=\operatorname{id}$. Thus $y=D_2y'$, and $\deg y\leq\deg y'$. By symmetry, we are through.

We know such a "degeneracy operator" is equivalently a surjective map $[n]\twoheadrightarrow[m]$. We can thus rewrite this as
 
**Corollary 4.** Let $X$ be a simplicial set. Denote the set of non-degenerate $m$-simplices of $X$ as $\operatorname{N}_m(X)\subset X_m$. Then

$$X_n=\bigsqcup_{[n]\twoheadrightarrow[m]}\operatorname{N}_m(X)$$

holds for all $n\geq 0$.

This perspective also leads to some understanding of morphisms in $\mathsf{sSet}$. For example, clearly we have:

**Proposition.** Suppose $f:X\to Y$ is a map of simplicial sets which sends non-degenerate simplices to non-degenerate simplices, that is, it induces a family of maps $\operatorname{N}_\bullet(X)\xrightarrow{f^{\text{nd}}_\bullet}\operatorname{N}_\bullet(Y)$. Then $f$ is injective (or surjective, or bijective) iff each $f^{\text{nd}}_\bullet$ has this property as well.

> Proof. Here
> 
> $$f_n=\bigsqcup_{[n]\twoheadrightarrow[m]}f^{\text{nd}}_m.$$

**Remark.** If $Y$ is a simplicial subset of $X$, then this condition is always satisfied, because every degenerace simplex in $X$ must be also degenerate in $Y$ if it lies in $Y$. Thus $\operatorname{N}_\bullet(Y)\subset\operatorname{N}_\bullet(X)$.

## Truncation, Skeleton and Coskeleton

<div style="text-align: center;">
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMiwwLCJYXzJcXHF1YWRcXGNkb3RzIl0sWzEsMCwiWF8xIl0sWzAsMCwiWF8wIl0sWzIsMV0sWzEsMiwiIiwxLHsib2Zmc2V0IjotM31dLFsxLDIsIiIsMSx7Im9mZnNldCI6M31dLFswLDFdLFsxLDAsIiIsMSx7Im9mZnNldCI6LTJ9XSxbMSwwLCIiLDEseyJvZmZzZXQiOjJ9XSxbMCwxLCIiLDEseyJvZmZzZXQiOi00fV0sWzAsMSwiIiwxLHsib2Zmc2V0Ijo0fV1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMiwwLCJYXzJcXHF1YWRcXGNkb3RzIl0sWzEsMCwiWF8xIl0sWzAsMCwiWF8wIl0sWzIsMV0sWzEsMiwiIiwxLHsib2Zmc2V0IjotM31dLFsxLDIsIiIsMSx7Im9mZnNldCI6M31dLFswLDFdLFsxLDAsIiIsMSx7Im9mZnNldCI6LTJ9XSxbMSwwLCIiLDEseyJvZmZzZXQiOjJ9XSxbMCwxLCIiLDEseyJvZmZzZXQiOi00fV0sWzAsMSwiIiwxLHsib2Zmc2V0Ijo0fV1d&embed" width="480" height="176" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</div>

**Example 5.** Recall that in [part 1](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0227.html), we mentioned that a graph can be seen as a one-dimensional CW complex. What this really means remains unclear. By viewing a (directed) graph as a topological space, the orientation of edges are lost, and we can't even recover the vertices and edges-only their homotopical data. It is much more natural to define a (directed; the undirected case is discussed in TODO) graph as a "one-dimensional" simplicial set, then realize (**Theorem TODO**) it as a topological space. We now establish this notion. 

Let $\Delta_{\leq m}$ be the full subcategory of $\Delta$ with objects $[0],[1],\cdots,[m]$. Let $i$ be the inclusion into $\Delta$. The *$m$-truncated simplicial objects* in $\mathcal{C}$ form the category $\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}_{\leq m}:=\operatorname{Fct}(\Delta_{\leq m}^{\text{op}},\mathcal{C})$. There is an evident *$m$-truncation* functor given by the pull-back:

$$i_m^*=\operatorname{tr}_m:\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}\longrightarrow\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}_{\leq m}.$$

We now have a category $\mathsf{sSet}_{\leq 1}$ to contain our graphs.

To remain in the category $\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}$, we wish to find a left adjoint and a right adjoint to $\operatorname{tr}_m$, thus forming:

<div style="text-align: center;">
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzfVxcbWF0aGNhbHtDfV97XFxsZXEgbX0iXSxbMiwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzfVxcbWF0aGNhbHtDfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcb3BlcmF0b3JuYW1le3RyfV9tIiwxXSxbMCwxLCJpX3ttIX0iLDAseyJvZmZzZXQiOi0xLCJjdXJ2ZSI6LTJ9XSxbMCwxLCJpX3ttKn0iLDIseyJvZmZzZXQiOjEsImN1cnZlIjoyfV0sWzMsMiwiIiwwLHsibGV2ZWwiOjEsInN0eWxlIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJhZGp1bmN0aW9uIn19XSxbMiw0LCIiLDAseyJsZXZlbCI6MSwic3R5bGUiOnsibmFtZSI6ImFkanVuY3Rpb24ifX1dXQ== -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzfVxcbWF0aGNhbHtDfV97XFxsZXEgbX0iXSxbMiwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzfVxcbWF0aGNhbHtDfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcb3BlcmF0b3JuYW1le3RyfV9tIiwxXSxbMCwxLCJpX3ttIX0iLDAseyJvZmZzZXQiOi0xLCJjdXJ2ZSI6LTJ9XSxbMCwxLCJpX3ttKn0iLDIseyJvZmZzZXQiOjEsImN1cnZlIjoyfV0sWzMsMiwiIiwwLHsibGV2ZWwiOjEsInN0eWxlIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJhZGp1bmN0aW9uIn19XSxbMiw0LCIiLDAseyJsZXZlbCI6MSwic3R5bGUiOnsibmFtZSI6ImFkanVuY3Rpb24ifX1dXQ==&embed" width="435" height="176" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</div>

Therefore we get a pair of functors $\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}\to\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}$:

- The composition $\operatorname{sk}_m:=i_{m!}\operatorname{tr}_m$ is called the *$m$-th skeleton*. Intuitively, it forgets all non-degenerate simplices of high-degree ($\dim\geq m$), only keeping a minimal number of high-degree simplices so we still have a simplicial set.
- The composition $\operatorname{cosk}_m:=i_{m*}\operatorname{tr}_m$ is called the *$m$-th coskeleton*. Intuitively, it forgets all high-degree simplices, then add every possible high-degree simplices whenever its boundaries are compatible. (To be precise, that its boundaries exists and their boudaries agree whenever they should.)

In $\mathsf{Set}$, these intuitions are indeed confirmed. We now give the construction of those adjoints. Note that they are formally dual to each other in a rigorous sense by Kan extensions, which we do not elaborate on.

**Theorem 6.** If $\mathcal{C}$ has all finite limits, then the left adjoint $i_{m!}$ exists. Let $\mathcal{Q}_n$ be the comma category $([n]/i)$, so its objects are maps $[n]\xrightarrow{\phi_{\overline{k}}}[k]$ where $k\leq m$. Given an $m$-truncated simplicial object $U$, define functors

$$\begin{align*}
    \widetilde{U}_n:\mathcal{Q}_n^{\operatorname{op}} & \longrightarrow \mathcal{C} \\
    \overline{k} & \longmapsto U([k]) \\
\end{align*}$$

That is, projection to the second coordinate (i.e. $(\operatorname{pr}_2)^{\operatorname{op}}:\mathcal{Q}_n^{\operatorname{op}}\to\Delta_{\leq m}^{\operatorname{op}}$) follow by $U$. Then put

$$(i_{m!}U)_n=\varinjlim_{\overline{k}}\widetilde{U}_n(\overline{k}).$$

> Proof. We first check that $i_{m!}U$ so defined gives a simplicial object. Fix a map $f:[n]\to[n']$. Then $f^*$ is a functor $\mathcal{Q}_{n'}\to\mathcal{Q}_{n}$ such that $\operatorname{pr}_2f^*=\operatorname{pr}_2$. It follows that
>
> $$\widetilde{U}_n(f^*)^{\operatorname{op}}=\widetilde{U}_{n'}.$$
>
> Then $(i_{m!}U)f$ is defined as the (co)limit of the following morphisms
>
> $$\widetilde{U}([n']\to[k])=\widetilde{U}([n]\to[k])\longrightarrow(i_{m!}U)_n.$$
>
> The simplicial identities holds by construction. And $i_{m!}$ is obviously functorial in $U$. 
> 
> It remains to check the adjunction
>
> $$\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}}(i_{m!}U,X)\simeq\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}_{\leq m}}(U,\operatorname{tr}_mX).$$
>
> This part is just as routine as above. We leave this to the reader who has nothing else to do.

**Theorem 7.** If $\mathcal{C}$ has all finite colimits, then the right adjoint $i_{m*}$ exists. Let $\mathcal{R}_n$ be the comma category $(i/[n])$, so its objects are maps $[k]\xrightarrow{\phi_{\underline{k}}}[n]$ where $k\leq m$. Given an $m$-truncated simplicial object $U$, define functors

$$\begin{align*}
    \widetilde{U}_n:\mathcal{R}_n^{\operatorname{op}} & \longrightarrow \mathcal{C} \\
    \underline{k} & \longmapsto U([k]) \\
\end{align*}$$

Then put

$$(i_{m*}U)_n=\varprojlim_{\underline{k}}\widetilde{U}_n(\underline{k}).$$

> Proof. Again we only show $i_{m*}U$ is a simplicial object and omit the proof of the adjunction
> 
> $$\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}}(X,i_{m*}U)\simeq\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}_{\leq m}}(\operatorname{tr}_mX,U).$$
> 
> Fix a map $f:[n]\to[n']$. Then $f_*$ is a functor $\mathcal{R}_{n}\to\mathcal{R}_{n'}$ such that $\operatorname{pr}_1f_*=\operatorname{pr}_1$. It follows that
>
> $$\widetilde{U}_{n'}(f_*)^{\operatorname{op}}=\widetilde{U}_{n}.$$
>
> Then $(i_{m*}U)f$ is defined as the limit of the following morphisms
>
> $$\widetilde{U}([k]\to[n])=\widetilde{U}([k]\to[n'])\longleftarrow(i_{m*}U)_{n'}.$$
>
> The simplicial identities holds by construction.

**Proposition 8.** We have natural isomorphisms

$$\operatorname{tr}_{m}i_{m!}\simeq\operatorname{id}\simeq\operatorname{tr}_{m}i_{m*}.$$

> Proof. When $n\leq m$, $\mathcal{Q}_n$ has an initial object, namely, $[n]\xrightarrow{\operatorname{id}}[n]$. Thus $(i_{m!}U)_n$ is naturally identified with $U_n$. Similar for $i_{m*}$.

**Proposition.** $\operatorname{sk}_m\dashv\operatorname{cosk}_m$.

> Proof. Obvious.

We compute a few examples/properties here. These by no means cover all combinatorics concerning these functors.

**Example 9.** If $U\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathsf{s}\mathcal{C}_{\leq 0})$, then $i_{0!}U=i_{0*}U=\operatorname{const}(U_0)$.

**Proposition 10.** If $X$ is a simplicial set, then $\operatorname{sk}_m(X)$ can be seen as a simplicial subset of $X$. The $n>m$ simplices of $\operatorname{sk}_m(X)$ are precisely the ones degenerated from the $k\leq m$ simplices. In formula, this is

$$(\operatorname{sk}_m(X))_n=\{Sx:x\in X_m\},\quad n>m$$

where $S$ represents the compositions of $n-m$ degeneracy maps.

> Proof. Notice from the colimit expression that every $n$-simplex of $\operatorname{sk}_m(X)$ is degenerate if $n>m$. Combining with **Proposition TODO**, we see that **Corollary TODO** applies to
> 
> $$\operatorname{N}_n(\operatorname{sk}_m(X))\subset\operatorname{N}_n(X),\quad\forall n\geq 0.$$

**Corollary.** For $n\geq 1$, we have $\operatorname{sk}_{n-1}(\Delta^n)=\partial\Delta^n$.

**Proposition.** $\operatorname{F}_n\operatorname{F}_{m}(X)=\operatorname{F}_{\min(n,m)}(X)$, where $\operatorname{F}\in\{\operatorname{sk},\operatorname{cosk}\}$.

> Proof. The statement about $\operatorname{sk}$ follows from the explicit description **Proposition TODO**. The only nontrivial case we need to compute is
>
> $$\operatorname{cosk}_n\operatorname{cosk}_m(X),\quad m<n.$$
>
> TODO

## Building Simplicial Sets

It turns out that simplicial sets can be constructed by a process akin to [building CW complexes](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0227.html).

**Proposition.** Let $X$ be a simplicial set, $m\geq 1$. The following is a  pushout diagram in $\mathsf{sSet}$:

<div style="text-align: center;">
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGJpZ3NxY3VwX3tcXG9wZXJhdG9ybmFtZXtOfV9tKFgpfVxccGFydGlhbFxcRGVsdGFebSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcYmlnc3FjdXBfe1xcb3BlcmF0b3JuYW1le059X20oWCl9XFxEZWx0YV5tIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxvcGVyYXRvcm5hbWV7c2t9X3ttLTF9KFgpIl0sWzEsMSwiXFxvcGVyYXRvcm5hbWV7c2t9X20oWCkiXSxbMCwxLCIiLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJob29rIiwic2lkZSI6InRvcCJ9fX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV0sWzAsMl0sWzEsM11d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGJpZ3NxY3VwX3tcXG9wZXJhdG9ybmFtZXtOfV9tKFgpfVxccGFydGlhbFxcRGVsdGFebSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcYmlnc3FjdXBfe1xcb3BlcmF0b3JuYW1le059X20oWCl9XFxEZWx0YV5tIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxvcGVyYXRvcm5hbWV7c2t9X3ttLTF9KFgpIl0sWzEsMSwiXFxvcGVyYXRvcm5hbWV7c2t9X20oWCkiXSxbMCwxLCIiLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJob29rIiwic2lkZSI6InRvcCJ9fX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV0sWzAsMl0sWzEsM11d&embed" width="493" height="260" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</div>

where the left and right arrows come from functoriality of $\operatorname{sk}$ and **Corollary TODO**.

> Proof. Note that the square commutes by the functoriality of $\operatorname{sk}_{m-1}$. We know that the forgetful functor $\operatorname{Fct}(\Delta,\mathsf{Set})\to\operatorname{Fct}(\operatorname{Ob}(\Delta),\mathsf{Set})$ creates all colimits, so it suffices to check the pushout at the level of $n$-simplices for each $n\geq 0$. Everything reduces to showing the right map restricts to a bijection
>
> $$\left(\bigsqcup\Delta^m\right)_n\setminus\left(\bigsqcup\partial\Delta^m\right)_n\longrightarrow\operatorname{sk}_m(X)_n\setminus\operatorname{sk}_{m-1}(X)_n.$$
>
> Clearly, both sides equal
> 
> $$\bigsqcup_{\operatorname{N}_m(X)}\left\{[n]\twoheadrightarrow[m]\right\}.$$

**Proposition.** Every simplicial set $X$ is the colimit of the increasing sequence

$$\operatorname{sk}_0(X)\hookrightarrow\operatorname{sk}_1(X)\hookrightarrow\cdots\hookrightarrow\operatorname{sk}_n(X)\hookrightarrow\cdots.$$

> Proof. This is obvious; the sequence stabilizes in each degree.

We have thus established any simplicial set as a colimit of standard simplices. One of the examples is we can inductively build $\operatorname{cosk}_m(X)$. The exact process is encapsulated by the following theorem.

**Theorem.** A simplicial set $X$ satisfies $X\simeq\operatorname{cosk}_m(X)$ iff it has the "unique filler" property, that is, for every $n>m$ the restriction map

$$\operatorname{Hom}(\Delta^n,X)\longrightarrow\operatorname{Hom}(\partial\Delta^n,X)$$

is a bijection.

> Proof. By **Proposition TODO** we have
>
> $$\operatorname{Hom}(\Delta^n,\operatorname{cosk}_{n-1}(X))\simeq\operatorname{Hom}(\partial\Delta^n,X).$$
>
> Easy exercise to see that this map is given by restriction. This proves the "only if" direction.
>
> Conversely, for an arbitrary simplicial set $Y$ and all $n>m$, apply the functor $\operatorname{Hom}(-,X)$ to the pushout in **proposition TODO**. We conclude that
> 
> $$\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{sk}_n(Y),X)\to\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{sk}_{n-1}(Y),X)$$
> 
> is a bijection for all $n>m$. Apply the same functor on **Proposition TODO**, we see that $\operatorname{Hom}(Y,X)$ is the limit of
>
> $$\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{sk}_0(Y),X)\longleftarrow\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{sk}_1(Y),X)\longleftarrow\cdots$$
>
> which is then $\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{sk}_m(Y),X)\simeq\operatorname{Hom}(Y,\operatorname{cosk}_m(X))$.

**Corollary 9.** $\operatorname{cosk}_1(\Delta^n)=\Delta^n$. It also follows that $\operatorname{cosk}_m(\Delta^n)=\Delta^n$ whenever $m\geq 1$.

> Proof. We will prove a more general version of this in **Proposition TODO**.

## Geometric Realization

Now we reveal the categorical consequences of our definition in the next series of results.

**Theorem 4.(Yoneda Lemma)** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a category, $S\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C})$, and $A\in\operatorname{\mathcal{C}^\wedge}$, we have a canonical bijection

$$\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}^\wedge}(h_{\mathcal{C}}(S),A)\xrightarrow{\sim}A(S),$$

which is natural in both $A$ and $S$.

> Proof. We can find the bijection quite easily.

**Theorem 5.(Density of representable functors)** Let $A\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C}^\wedge)$. Define the category of elements of $A$ as the comma category

$${\textstyle\int}A:=(h_{\mathcal{C}}/A),$$

So its objects are pairs $(S,h_{\mathcal{C}}(S)\xrightarrow{\phi}A)$ and the morphisms are commuting triangles. Then 

$$\varinjlim_{(S,\phi)}h_{\mathcal{C}}(S)\xrightarrow{\sim}A.$$

> Proof. By the Yoneda lemma, $\int A$ can equivalently be described as having pairs $(S,x)$, $x\in A(S)$, as objects. The morphisms $(S,x)\to(T,y)$ are morphisms $S\xrightarrow{f}T$ such that $A(f)(y)=x$.
>
> We now directly check that $A$ joined with all $\phi$'s satisfies the universal property of the colimit. Suppose there's $A'\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C}^\wedge)$ and compatible maps $\alpha_{(S,x)}:h_{\mathcal{C}}(S)\to A'$. There is only one way (uniqueness) to define $\varphi:A\to A'$, namely, let 
> 
> $$\varphi_S: x \longmapsto \text{element of }A'(S)\text{ corresponding to }\alpha_{(S,x)}.$$
>
> It all boils down to checking these two simple facts:
>
> - $\varphi$ is a natural transformation $A\to A'$;
> - $\varphi_{T}\circ(\phi_{(S,x)})_{T}=(\alpha_{(S,x)})_{T}$ for all $S,T\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C})$ and $x\in A(S)$.

**Theorem 6.(Abstract realization)** Let a small category $\mathcal{C}$ and a functor $F:\mathcal{C}\to\mathcal{D}$, where $\mathcal{D}$ is assumed to be cocomplete, i.e. has a small colimits. Then we can extend $F$ to a functor

$$\begin{align*}
    \widetilde{F}: \mathcal{C}^\wedge & \longrightarrow\mathcal{D} \\
    A & \longmapsto \varinjlim_{(S,\phi)}F(S)
\end{align*}$$

in the the sense of a natural isomorphism $\widetilde{F}h_{\mathcal{C}}\simeq F$. Moreover, $\widetilde{F}$ has a right adjoint:

$$\begin{align*}
    \mathcal{Hom}(F,-):\mathcal{D} & \longrightarrow\mathcal{C}^\wedge \\
    Y & \longmapsto \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{D}}(F(-),Y)
\end{align*}$$

> Proof. $\varphi:A\to A'$ induces a functor 
> 
> $$\begin{align*}
>   (h_{\mathcal{C}}/A) & \longrightarrow (h_{\mathcal{C}}/A') \\
>   (S,\phi) & \longmapsto (S,\varphi\phi)
> \end{align*}$$
> 
> which makes $\widetilde{F}$ a functor. To see that $\widetilde{F}h_{\mathcal{C}}\simeq F$, simply obverve that $A=h_{\mathcal{C}}(T)$ is the terminal object in $(h_{\mathcal{C}}/A)$, so there is a canonical $\widetilde{F}h_{\mathcal{C}}(T)\xrightarrow{\sim}F(T)$.
>
> Now, let $X\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{C})$ and $Y\in\operatorname{Ob}(\mathcal{D})$. We compute
>
> $$\begin{align*}
>   \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}^\wedge}(X,\mathcal{Hom}(F,Y)) & \simeq \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}^\wedge}(\varinjlim h_{\mathcal{C}}(S),\mathcal{Hom}(F,Y)) \\
>   & \simeq \varinjlim\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}^\wedge}(h_{\mathcal{C}}(S),\mathcal{Hom}(F,Y)) \\
>   & \simeq \varinjlim\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{D}}(F(S),Y) \\
>   & \simeq \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{D}}(\varinjlim F(S),Y) \\
>   & \simeq \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{D}}(\widetilde{F}(X),Y). \\
> \end{align*}$$
>
> where all colimits are taken over $(h_{\mathcal{C}}/X)$.

**Remark.** $\widetilde{F}$ is the left Kan extension of $F$ along the Yoneda embedding, and $\mathcal{Hom}(F,-)$ is the left Kan extension of the Yoneda embedding along $F$. 

Applying **Theorem 6** to our category $\Delta$, we obtain an important functor:

**Definition-Theorem 7.(Geometric realization)** There is a *geometric realization functor* $\vert\cdot\vert:\mathsf{sSet}\to\mathsf{Top}$, satisfying the adjunction

<div style="text-align: center;">
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzU2V0fSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcbWF0aHNme1RvcH0iXSxbMCwxLCJcXHZlcnRcXGNkb3RcXHZlcnQiLDAseyJjdXJ2ZSI6LTF9XSxbMSwwLCJcXG9wZXJhdG9ybmFtZXtTaW5nfSIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzU2V0fSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcbWF0aHNme1RvcH0iXSxbMCwxLCJcXHZlcnRcXGNkb3RcXHZlcnQiLDAseyJjdXJ2ZSI6LTF9XSxbMSwwLCJcXG9wZXJhdG9ybmFtZXtTaW5nfSIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV1d&embed" width="304" height="170" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</div>

where $\operatorname{Sing}:\mathsf{Top}\to\mathsf{sSet}$ is the *singular set* functor whose meaning will become clear from the proof.

> Proof. We apply the abstract realization to the evident functor $F:\Delta\to\mathsf{Top}$ which sends $[n]$ to the (topological) standard $n$-simplex
>
> $$\left\{(x_0,x_1,\cdots,x_n)\in(\mathbb{R}_{\geq 0})^{n+1}:\sum_{i=0}^nx_i=1\right\},$$
>
> and sends each order-preseving map $f:[n]\to[m]$ to
>
> $$\sum_{i=0}^nx_ie_i\longmapsto\sum_{i=0}^mx_ie_{f(i)}.$$
>
> Then the functors are given by
>
> $$\vert X\vert=\varinjlim_{(n\geq 0,x\in X_n)}F([n])=\varinjlim_{(n,x)}\vert\Delta^n\vert,$$
>
> $$\operatorname{Sing}(M)_n=\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathsf{Top}}(\vert\Delta^n\vert,M),\quad n\geq 0.$$

By definition, geometric realization preserves colimits. Thus the results from [the last section](https://caelestia.github.io/2025/0302.html#building-simplicial-sets) exhibits every $\vert X\vert$ as a CW complex whose $n$-cells correspond to non-degenerate $n$-simplices of $X$.

- image = triangulable spaces

It is also true that if $Y$ is a simplicial subset of $X$, then $\vert Y\vert$ is a CW subcomplex of $\vert X\vert$.

- preserves equalizers

- space=CGWH, preserves finite products

- Another important consequence is the fact that $\mathsf{sSet}$, or in general any presheaf category $\operatorname{Fct}(\mathcal{C},\mathsf{Set})$ over a small $\mathcal{C}$, is cartesian closed. Apply the theorem to $S\mapsto h_{\mathcal{C}}(S)\times X$ and use that $-\times X$ preserves all colimits naturally, because it does so in $\mathsf{Set}$, which is cartesian closed.

# Nerve of a Category

Another instance of **Theorem TODO** gives a very common family of simplicial sets. The functor we consider is $\Delta\hookrightarrow\mathsf{Cat}$ sending each $[n]$ to its poset category. Since $\mathsf{Cat}$ is cocomplete, this induces an adjunction pair

<div style="text-align: center;">
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzU2V0fSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcbWF0aHNme0NhdH0iXSxbMCwxLCJoIiwwLHsiY3VydmUiOi0xfV0sWzEsMCwiTiIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhzZntzU2V0fSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcbWF0aHNme0NhdH0iXSxbMCwxLCJoIiwwLHsiY3VydmUiOi0xfV0sWzEsMCwiTiIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFsyLDMsIiIsMCx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV1d&embed" width="304" height="170" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</div>

The functor $N$ is called the *nerve of a category*. Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a (small) category, we have 

$$N\mathcal{C}_n=\operatorname{Fct}([n],\mathcal{C}).$$

So an $n$-simplex of $N\mathcal{C}$ is a chain of $n$ morphisms in $\mathcal{C}$:

$$C_0\xrightarrow{f_1}C_1\xrightarrow{f_2}C_2\cdots\xrightarrow{f_n}C_n.$$

We leave it to the reader to see the face and degeneracy maps.

**Example.** $N([n])=\Delta^n$.

**Example.** Let $G$ be a group. View $G$ as a category with one object $\star$ and $\operatorname{End}(\star)=G.$ The simplicial set $BG:=N(G^{\operatorname{op}})$ (or its geometric realization) is called the classifying space for $G$-principal bundles.

**Proposition.** The nerve satisfies

- If $P$ is a poset then $N(P)=\operatorname{cosk}_1(N(P))$.
- If $\mathcal{C}$ is a category then $N(\mathcal{C})=\operatorname{cosk}_2(N(\mathcal{C}))$.

> Proof. 

**Remark.** The usual barycentric subdivision of a standard $n$-simplex can be defined as the nerve $NK^n$, where $K^n$ is the poset of non-degenerate simplices in $\Delta^n$, ordered by face relation. This is functorial in $n$.

For example, $\operatorname{Sd}(\Delta^n)$ has seven $0$-simplices corresponding to each of the $3$ points, $3$ edges and the triangle; twelve non-degenerate $1$-simplices connecting "related" points; and six non-degenerate $2$-simplices.

Then, in virtue of **Theorem TODO**, we get a pair of adjoint functors $\operatorname{Sd}$, $\operatorname{Ex}:\mathsf{sSet}\to\mathsf{sSet}$.

# Abstract Simplicial Complexes

- presence of orientation

# Final remarks

We've seen throughout this note various instances of the "abstract realization schema". Another such concept is the étale space of a presheaf over a topological space $X$. Here the functor to extend is 

$$\begin{align*}
    \operatorname{Ouv}(X) & \to \mathsf{Top}/X \\
    U & \mapsto[U\hookrightarrow X]
\end{align*}$$

Then the right adjoint $\mathsf{Top}/X\to\operatorname{Psh}(X)$ is exactly constructing the sheaf of sections.

We'll touch upon the power of another interesting application next time.

> I think future posts will be written in *real* latex and I'm still figuring out how to convert things into html. (which should imply that Tikz will be available to me?) I finally realized how stupid the idea of writing this in markdown was when it was already a bit too late.

---
Post date: 2025/03/02 \
[Home page](https://caelestia.github.io)