# Similarity of matrices and field extension

This is a result that I forgot long ago. Probably didn't understand its significance very well. 

Our goal is the following:

**Theorem 1.** Let $E\vert F$ be a field extension and $V$ be an $F$-vector space. The similarity class of $A\in\operatorname{End}(V)$ is determined by the similarity class of $A\otimes_F\operatorname{id}_E\in\operatorname{End}(V\otimes_FE)$.

---

We first recall the well known module theoretical perspective:

**Lemma 1.** Associate to every $A\in\operatorname{End}(V)$ the $F[X]$-module $V^A$ via the obvious choice $X\mapsto A$. Then $V^A\simeq V^B$ as $F[X]$-modules if and only if $A\sim B$.

> Proof. Almost trivial by the following diagram.

<center>
<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJWXkEiXSxbMCwxLCJWXkIiXSxbMSwwLCJWXkEiXSxbMSwxLCJWXkIiXSxbMCwyLCJBIl0sWzEsMywiQiIsMl0sWzAsMSwiXFxzaW0iLDJdLFsyLDMsIlxcc2ltIl1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJWXkEiXSxbMCwxLCJWXkIiXSxbMSwwLCJWXkEiXSxbMSwxLCJWXkIiXSxbMCwyLCJBIl0sWzEsMywiQiIsMl0sWzAsMSwiXFxzaW0iLDJdLFsyLDMsIlxcc2ltIl1d&embed" width="304" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
</center>

For the sake of completeness, I will prove the entire classification of finitely generated modules over a PID here.

**Lemma 2.** If $F$ is a free module over a PID $R$ and $M\subset F$ is a submodule, then $M$ is free and $\operatorname{rk}(M)\leq\operatorname{rk}(F)$.

> Proof. Take a well-ordered basis $X$ of $F$. For any $x\in X$, denote $F_x:=\langle y:y\leq x\rangle$ the free submodule, and $\pi_x$ the coordinate map with respect to $x$. For every $x$, using the ideal
>
> $$(d_x):=\pi_x(F_x\cap M),\quad d_x\in R$$
>
> we can pick a $m_x\in F_x\cap M$ such that $\pi_x(m_x)=d_x$.
>
> We claim that the set $\{m_x:d_x\neq 0\}$ provides a basis for $M$. It is clear that it's linearly independant. To see that every $m\in M$ is in the span, we use induction on $x$. The base case ($x$ is minimal) is trivial. Suppose $F_y\cap M=\langle m_z:d_z\neq 0,z\leq y\rangle$ for all $y<x$. Every $m\in F_x\cap M$ can be expressed as
>
> $$m=a_1y_1+a_2y_2+\cdots+a_ny_n,$$
>
> where $y_1<y_2<\cdots<y_n=x$. But then $a_n=\pi_x(m)\in(d_x)$. So there is a scalar $e$ such that $a_n=d_xe$ and we get $m-em_x\in F_{y_{n-1}}\cap M$, as desired.

**Lemma 3.** Suppose $M$ is a finitely generated module over a PID $R$. Let $M_\text{tor}$ denote the submodule of $M$ of all torsion elements. Then the torsion-free part $M_\text{tf}:=M/M_\text{tor}$ is free. Therefore, if its rank is $k$, $M$ factorizes as
 
$$M=M_\text{tor}\oplus M_\text{tf}\simeq M_\text{tor}\oplus R^k.\tag{1}$$

> Proof. Clearly, the "torsion-free" part is indeed torsion free. For, if $r\overline{m}=\overline{0}$ for $r\in R^\times$ and $\overline{m}=m+M_\text{tor}\in M_\text{tf}$, we have $rm\in M_\text{tor}$, so $m\in M_\text{tor}$ as well.
>
> Now pick a finite spannning set $X$ of $M_\text{tf}$ and a maximal linearly independent subset $Y\subset X$. For any $x\in X$, there is some $r_x\in R^\times$ such that $r_xx\in\bigoplus_{y\in Y}Ry$. Let $s:=\prod_{x\in X}r_x$, we have a well defined injection
>
> $$\begin{align*}
>    M_\text{tf}&\longrightarrow\bigoplus_{y\in Y}Ry \\
>    m&\longmapsto sm
> \end{align*}$$
>
> **Lemma 2.** shows that $M_\text{tf}$ is free.

**Theorem 2.** Let $M$ be a finitely generated module over a PID $R$. Then there exists a *unique* finite descending chain of ideals

$$R\neq(d_1)\supset(d_2)\supset\cdots\supset(d_n),$$

called the invariant factors of $M$, such that

$$M\simeq\bigoplus_{i=1}^nR/(d_i).$$

> Proof of existence. (1) takes care of the torsion-free part of $M$, i.e., the $d_i$'s that are zero. Hence, in any free resolution of $M$[^1]:
>
> $$0\longrightarrow R^m\longrightarrow R^n\longrightarrow M\longrightarrow 0$$
>
> we may consider the "minimal" interesting part
>
> $$0\longrightarrow R^m\xrightarrow{\psi}R^m\longrightarrow M_\text{tor}\longrightarrow 0$$
>
> in the sense that $m$ is minimal. Let $N:=\operatorname{im}\psi\subset R^m$ be the free submodule.
>
> ---
>
> Now we can do induction on $m$. The base case $m=0$ is trivial, so let $m\geq 1$. Consider the ideals
>
> $$\left\{f(N):f\in(R^m)^\vee\right\}$$
>
> Since R is Noetherian, there is a maximal element $(d_1):=f_1(N)$. $f_1$ is nonzero as $N$ is nonzero. Thus $\ker f_1\subset R^m$ has rank $m-1$.
> 
> In order to descend, we also need that $\operatorname{im}f_1=R$. Since we can take $f$ to be the coordinate maps of $R^m$, $d_1$ divides all coordinates of elements in $N$. In particular, $f_1(x)=1$ for some $x\in R^m$ satisfying $d_1x\in N$ [^2] and $f_1(d_1x)=d_1$. Therefore, since $R$ is free,
>
> $$\begin{align*}
>   R^m&=\phantom{(N}\ker f_1\phantom{\cap)}\oplus Rx\\
>   N&=(N\cap\ker f_1)\oplus Rd_1x\\
> \end{align*}$$
>
> ---
>
> We can now descend to $m-1$ using the induction hypothesis
>
> $$\frac{\ker f_1}{N\cap\ker f_1}\simeq\bigoplus_{i=2}^{m}R/(d_i).$$
>
> It remains to show that $R\neq(d_1)\supset(d_2)$. The first part follows from the minimality of $m$, while the second part follows from the maximality of $(d_1)$.

[^1]: The resolution only has two terms due to **Lemma 2**.

[^2]: We have constructed $x$ to be the element with maximal order $=d_1$ in $R^m/N$.

> Proof of uniqueness. The starting point is (1) as well. Since commutative rings has the invariant basis number property, $k$ is unique determined by $M$.  
>
> Given a module
>
> $$M\simeq\bigoplus_{i=1}^nR/(d_i)$$
>
> such that $\operatorname{Ann}(M)=(d_n)\neq 0$, we want to read off the $d_i$'s from the structure of $M$. Given an irreducible $p$, the $p$-primary part of $M$ is
>
> $$M[p^\infty]\simeq\bigoplus_{i=1}^n(R/(d_i))[p^\infty]\overset{\text{CRT}}{=}\bigoplus_{i=1}^nR/(p^{\alpha_i}),$$
>
> where $\alpha_i=\nu_p(d_i)$. To find $\alpha_i$, notice that $M[p]$ has an invariant dimension as an $F:=R/(p)$-vector space. We thus have a sequence of invariants
>
> $$l_0:=\dim_FM[p],\,l_1:=\dim_F(pM)[p],\cdots,l_j:=\dim_F(p^jM)[p],\cdots$$
>
> Observe that $l_j=\vert\{i:\alpha_i\geq j\}\vert$. This shows that the $l_j$'s determine the $\alpha_i$'s and hence the $d_i$'s.

---

We can now prove the main theorem.

> Proof of Theorem 1. Let $\operatorname{Irr}(R)$ be the set of irreducible monic polynomials in $R[X]$. Suppose that
>
> $$V^A=\bigoplus_{i=1}^nF[X]/(d_i).$$
>
> The factorization of $d_i$ in $F$ and $E$ are related through a unique map $\xi$, defined by
>
> $$f\in\operatorname{Irr}(F)\implies f=\prod_{e\in\operatorname{Irr}(E)}e^{\xi(f,e)}.$$
>
> Now
>
> $$\frac{F[X]}{(f^k)}\otimes E\simeq\frac{E[X]}{(f^k)\otimes E}\simeq\prod_{e\in\operatorname{Irr}(E)}\frac{E[X]}{(e^{k\xi(f,e)})}.$$
>
> The second isomorphism is an isomorphism of $E[X]$-modules. It can be directly checked that the first map is also one. Note that for every $e\in\operatorname{Irr}(E)$, there is a unique $f\in\operatorname{Irr}(F)$ such that $e\vert f$, i.e. $\xi(f,e)>0$. By the uniqueness of the classification, this shows that any finitely generated $F[X]$-module $M$ is determined by the $E[X]$-module $M\otimes_FE$, up to isomorphism.
>
> It remains to check that the module we constructed above is what we need, i.e., that
>
> $$V^A\otimes E\simeq(V\otimes_FE)^{A\otimes\operatorname{id}}.$$
>
> There is an obvious map $v\otimes e\mapsto v\otimes e$ that does the job.

<!-- TODO -->

---
Post date: 2024/12/07 \
[Home page](https://caelestia.github.io)